Build system upgrades (#406)
ostis-ai/sc-machine: docs/build/build_system.md

```sh
# release build type with tests (no conan postfix = system-provided deps)
cmake --preset release-with-tests
cmake --build --preset release
```

The build artifacts will be located in the `build/<Release|Debug>/bin` folder.

Default installation folder location (used for package consumption) is `build/<Release|Debug>/install`, installation process can be fired by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` command.

## Consuming the package

<details markdown>

<summary>find_package() using CPack artifacts on GitHub Actions</summary>

The package artifacts are available [here](https://github.com/ostis-ai/sc-machine/releases). To use these in your CMake project, download and extract the release for your platform to any convenient location. Then make it available to CMake by appending folder path to `CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`:

```cmake
# import sc-machine from the Releases archive
# you can override this variable via -D<proj_name>_PATH_SC_MACHINE_PATH or CMakeUserPreset.json / CMakePreset.json files
set(<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH "/location/to/sc-machine-<version>-<platform>" CACHE PATH "sc-machine installation path")

> # can be override using env variables as well

Reviewer: My extension in vscode has me a little confused)

If you wish to use CLI instead, you can list all the available configurations in the `CMakePresets.json` file and pick one of the presets:

```sh
cmake --list-presets
```

For example, this is how to build sc-machine in debug mode using dependencies from Conan:

```sh
# use pipx to install Conan if not already installed
# Install pipx first using this guide: https://pipx.pypa.io/stable/installation/ 
pipx install conan
# Use preset with Conan-provided dependencies and debug build type
cmake --preset debug-conan
# Use debug build preset since we've used a debug configure preset
cmake --build --preset debug
```

This is how you would build sc-machine in release mode using system-provided dependencies:

```sh
# release build type with tests (no conan postfix = system-provided deps)
cmake --preset release-with-tests
cmake --build --preset release
```

The build artifacts will be located in the `build/<Release|Debug>/bin` folder.

> Default installation folder location (used for package consumption) is `build/<Release|Debug>/install`, installation process can be fired by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` command.

Reviewer: okay

> Default installation folder location (used for package consumption) is `build/<Release|Debug>/install`, installation process can be fired by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` command.

Author: @kilativ-dotcom I've made it a bit more friendly
```suggestion
We also define `INSTALL` instructions in our CMake. This routine can be launched by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` folder. The result of this command will reside in `build/<Release|Debug>/install` (our default install folder). Install folder is basically a pack of portable executable files and shared libraries required to get sc-machine up and running, this command is intended to create clutter-free archives/folders with our code which you can then use in your own projects.
```

<details markdown>

<summary>find_package() using CPack artifacts on GitHub Actions</summary>

The package artifacts are available [here](https://github.com/ostis-ai/sc-machine/releases). To use these in your CMake project, download and extract the release for your platform to any convenient location. Then make it available to CMake by appending folder path to `CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`:

```cmake
# import sc-machine from the Releases archive
# you can override this variable via -D<proj_name>_PATH_SC_MACHINE_PATH or CMakeUserPreset.json / CMakePreset.json files
set(<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH "/location/to/sc-machine-<version>-<platform>" CACHE PATH "sc-machine installation path")

# can be overriden using env variables as well
if(DEFINED ENV{<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH})
  set(<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH "$ENV{<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH}")
endif()

list(APPEND CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH ${<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH})
```
</details>

<details markdown>

<summary>find_package() using Conan</summary>

- You want to use a released version of sc-machine
  
  Simply add sc-machine as a dependency to your project and use Conan to install it for you.

  conanfile.txt:

  ```ini
  [requires]

>   sc-machine/0.10.0

Reviewer 2: what does 0.10.0 means here?

Reviewer: Here is the first version of the sc-machine to be released with the new build system, which has conan

  [generators]
  CMakeDeps
  CMakeToolchain

  [layout]
  cmake_layout
  ```

  ```sh
  conan install .
  cmake --preset conan-release
  cmake --build --preset conan-release
  ```

- You want to use a package version that is not published in a Conan repo:
  
  Export the version you'd like to use to local conan cache:
  ```sh
  git clone https://github.com/ostis-ai/sc-machine
  git checkout <your-commit>
  cmake --preset release-conan
  cmake --build --preset release --target install

>   conan export-pkg .

Reviewer 2: is this error expected when executing `conan export-pkg .`?
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fef0eb0c-6edc-4684-bc18-2f9cea21a13b)

Reviewer 2: if I need to run this command instead of one mentioned in docs then docs should be updated, shouldn't it?

Author: You shouldn't run `conan install`, since this step should be handled by `conan_provider.cmake`. While @NikitaZotov's answer is technically not wrong, gtest will build happily with either cppstd, it's just that export-pkg doesn't allow building the packages from sources by default. This case is curious though: I would suppose that running `cmake --preset release-conan` would install all the deps, because it runs `conan install . --build=missing` under the hood, which is why I didn't encounter this error.

Does this replicate on a clean installation if you pick `debug-conan` as the CMake preset?

Reviewer: @FallenChromium, configure sc-machine both with `debug-conan` and with `release-conan` presets don't solve this problem. `conan export-pkg .` ends with the same error.  `conan graph explain .` shows this: 

![Снимок экрана от 2024-11-24 13-42-24](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/90ab1e87-55aa-4ea1-8744-c0c785039d2e)

Reviewer: It can be solved if we will change `self.test_requires("gtest/1.14.0")` to `self.build_requires("gtest/1.14.0")` in build_requirements of conanfile.py

Reviewer: @kilativ-dotcom, you need to manually set the version in conanfile.py

It's almost always problematic to edit a project while also consuming it as a library from another project. Luckily, if you've installed sc-machine in your project using Conan, there is a relatively easy solution to that problem.

```sh
conan editable add <path to sc-machine repo>
conan editable list
# sc-machine of the corresponding version should be in the output
# make changes in the project and run a rebuild
cmake --preset debug-conan
# using a debug build since that would allow us to step into the library's code while debugging
cmake --build --preset debug
```

The same is true for installations that have used GitHub Releases artifacts. Download the sc-machine repo, configure it, run `cmake --build --preset <preset> --target install` and add `sc-machine/build/<Debug|Release>/install` to `CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH` of your project. Re-running `cmake --build --preset <preset> --target install` is enough to propagate changes to the consumer.

Relaunch the compilation steps in your project and you should be good to go!

You can find more info in [Conan docs](https://docs.conan.io/2/tutorial/developing_packages/editable_packages.html).

### Falling Back to System Dependencies

> If Conan is not used, the build system will attempt to find system-installed dependencies. Ensure that the necessary development packages are installed on your system.

Reviewer: A build system for the sc-machine is a set of tools and scripts designed to automate the process of transforming the sc-machine source code into executable programs, libraries, or extensions.

> If Conan is not used, the build system will attempt to find system-installed dependencies. Ensure that the necessary development packages are installed on your system.

Reviewer 2: do you mean cmake or what?

> If Conan is not used, the build system will attempt to find system-installed dependencies. Ensure that the necessary development packages are installed on your system.

Reviewer: Maybe, your variant is better, okay

# Build system

## Implementation details

The project uses CMake as the build system generator. CMake allows for cross-platform builds and provides the necessary flexibility for both project development and its use in external projects.

[Conan](https://conan.io) is integrated as an optional dependency manager via dependency resolver mechanism introduced in CMake 3.24 (see `cmake/conan_provider.cmake`). Conan helps us manage external libraries and allows us to create reproducible developer environment with ease. However, the build system is designed to work without Conan if needed.

> ## Compilation steps
> 
> Typical configurations of the project are provided in the `CMakePresets.json` file – this means that if you use a modern IDE, **no additional configuration is needed**. Just pick one of the configurations provided by this file and use controls in your IDE to recompile and run tests (should work with VSCode + CMake Tools extension, JetBrains CLion and probably many others).
> 
> If you wish to use CLI instead, you can list all the available configurations in the `CMakePresets.json` file and pick one of the presets:
> 
> ```sh
> cmake --list-presets
> ```
> 
> !!! warning
>     By default, the standard repositories for Ubuntu 22.04 provide CMake version 3.22, which does not support certain features required for working with CMakePresets.json. To avoid issues during the build process, you need to manually install CMake version 3.24 or higher.

Author: Since people read sequentially it makes sense to move the warning before the first cmake invocation. I've reworded the warning a bit so that it'd be more helpful to beginners.
```suggestion
## Compilation steps

!!! warning
    Our build system settings require using CMake 3.24 or newer. Make sure your version is compatible by running `cmake --version` and use the [CMake installation guide](https://cliutils.gitlab.io/modern-cmake/chapters/intro/installing.html) to upgrade to latest version if yours is older than 3.24. The universal method is to use `pipx install cmake` (don't forget to run `pipx ensurepath` and relaunching your shell after installation), but you may choose reconfiguring your OS's package manager instead.

Typical configurations of the project are provided in the `CMakePresets.json` file – this means that if you use a modern IDE, **no additional configuration is needed**. Just pick one of the configurations provided by this file and use controls in your IDE to recompile and run tests (should work with VSCode + CMake Tools extension, JetBrains CLion and probably many others).

If you wish to use CLI instead, you can list all the available configurations in the `CMakePresets.json` file and pick one of the presets:

```sh
cmake --list-presets
```
```

Relaunch the compilation steps in your project and you should be good to go!

You can find more info in [Conan docs](https://docs.conan.io/2/tutorial/developing_packages/editable_packages.html).

### Falling Back to System Dependencies

If Conan is not used, the build system will attempt to find system-installed dependencies. Ensure that the necessary development packages are installed on your system.

Currently, we require the following packages to be available to CMake at build-time:

- `java`
- `glib2`
- `websocketpp`
  - [`asio`](https://think-async.com/Asio/) as the transitive dependency
- `nlohmann_json`
- `xml2`

> You can use convenience scripts provided in our repo (`scripts/install_deps_ubuntu.sh` and `scripts/install_deps_macOS.sh`) to install these dependencies.

Reviewer: I think the way it's written now will be clearer for users, they'll understand what's being invoked

# Build system

## Implementation details

> The project uses CMake as the build system generator. CMake allows for cross-platform builds and provides the necessary flexibility for both project development and its use in external projects.

Author: It was phrased this way since it is technically correct - we use Ninja / Make as our build system and CMake generates the definitions for us.
<img width="1281" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/62450892-f85b-4770-b254-80cc014d9aaf">

> The project uses CMake as the build system generator. CMake allows for cross-platform builds and provides the necessary flexibility for both project development and its use in external projects.

Reviewer: I propose to insert link to CMake

|------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `debug`                      | Debug config with tests and benchmarks                           | Use for debugging and testing during development.               |
| `debug-conan`                | Debug config with tests and benchmarks (Conan dependencies used) | Use if you are utilizing Conan for dependency management.       |
| `release`                    | Release config                                                   | Use for production-ready builds.                                |
| `release-conan`              | Release config (Conan dependencies used)                         | Use if you are utilizing Conan for dependency management.       |
| `release-with-tests`         | Release config with tests                                        | Use for production builds that require testing.                 |
| `release-with-tests-conan`   | Release config with tests (Conan dependencies used)              | Use if you want to run tests in a production build using Conan. |

### Build Presets

> These presets are linked to the configure presets and define how the build process is executed.
> 
> | **Name**   | **Configure Preset**  |
> |------------|-----------------------|
> | `debug`    | debug                 |
> | `release`  | release               |

Author: ```suggestion
These presets are linked to the configure presets and are used by CMake to determine the build folder (`build/Debug` or `build/Release` by default).

| **Name**   | **Configure Preset**  |
|------------|-----------------------|
| `debug`    | debug / debug-conan                 |
| `release`  | release / release-with-tests / release-conan / release-with-tests-conan               |
```

| `release-conan`  | release-conan          |
| `release`        | release                |

### Recommendations

- For development and debugging, use the **Debug config** (`debug`) preset. This configuration includes options for testing and benchmarking, making it ideal for development environments where you need to troubleshoot and test your code.
- For production builds, choose the **Release config** (`release`) preset to create optimized builds without debugging information. This is suitable for deploying applications.
- If your project relies on Conan, select either the **Debug config (Conan)** (`debug-conan`) or the **Release config (Conan)** (`release-conan`) presets, depending on whether you are debugging or preparing a release.
- Choose the **Release config with tests** (`release-with-tests`) or its Conan variant (`release-with-tests-conan`) if you want to ensure that your production build has been tested thoroughly before deployment.

For example, this is how to build sc-machine in debug mode using dependencies from Conan:

```sh
# Use pipx to install Conan if not already installed
# Install pipx first using guide: https://pipx.pypa.io/stable/installation/ 

> pipx install conan

Reviewer: I don't know what to tell you about that :)

> pipx install conan

Reviewer: okay

# Use preset with Conan-provided dependencies and debug build type
cmake --preset debug-conan
# Use debug build preset since we've used a debug configure preset
cmake --build --preset debug
```

This is how you would build sc-machine in release mode using system-provided dependencies:

```sh
# release build type with tests (no conan postfix = system-provided deps)
cmake --preset release-with-tests
cmake --build --preset release
```

The build artifacts will be located in the `build/<Release|Debug>/bin` folder.

> We also define `INSTALL` instructions in our CMake. This routine can be launched by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` folder. The result of this command will reside in `build/<Release|Debug>/install` (our default install folder). Install folder is basically a pack of portable executable files and shared libraries required to get sc-machine up and running, this command is intended to create clutter-free archives/folders with our code which you can then use in your own projects.

Reviewer: Most likely, this refers to the folder that is created with this command

> We also define `INSTALL` instructions in our CMake. This routine can be launched by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` folder. The result of this command will reside in `build/<Release|Debug>/install` (our default install folder). Install folder is basically a pack of portable executable files and shared libraries required to get sc-machine up and running, this command is intended to create clutter-free archives/folders with our code which you can then use in your own projects.

Author: That should be "command"

- You want to use a released version of sc-machine
  
  Simply add sc-machine as a dependency to your project and use Conan to install it for you.

  conanfile.txt:

  ```ini
  [requires]
  sc-machine/0.10.0

  [generators]
  CMakeDeps
  CMakeToolchain

  [layout]
  cmake_layout
  ```

  ```sh
  conan install .
  cmake --preset conan-release
  cmake --build --preset conan-release
  ```

- You want to use a package version that is not published in a Conan repo:
  
  Export the version you'd like to use to local conan cache:
  ```sh
  git clone https://github.com/ostis-ai/sc-machine
  git checkout <your-commit>
  cmake --preset release-conan
  cmake --build --preset release --target install
  conan export-pkg .
  # you should see the package version and revision exported to local conan cache
  ```

  Then in your project edit conanfile.txt and add the following:

  ```ini
  [requires]
  # git commit is also the revision
  sc-machine/0.10.0#0c1889bc6a34450c7728b4b12af9083910cebb36

  [generators]
  CMakeDeps
  CMakeToolchain

  [layout]
  cmake_layout
  ```

  Finally, build your project

  ```sh
  conan install .
  cmake --preset conan-release

>   cmake --build --preset conan-release

Reviewer: Yes, after build in release mode you will have new folder that will contain the build tree in release mode

- If your project relies on Conan, select either the **Debug config (Conan)** (`debug-conan`) or the **Release config (Conan)** (`release-conan`) presets, depending on whether you are debugging or preparing a release.
- Choose the **Release config with tests** (`release-with-tests`) or its Conan variant (`release-with-tests-conan`) if you want to ensure that your production build has been tested thoroughly before deployment.

### Example usage

For example, this is how to build sc-machine in debug mode using dependencies from Conan:

```sh
# Use pipx to install Conan if not already installed
# Install pipx first using guide: https://pipx.pypa.io/stable/installation/ 
pipx install conan
```

```sh
# Use preset with Conan-provided dependencies and debug build type
cmake --preset debug-conan
# Use debug build preset since we've used a debug configure preset
cmake --build --preset debug
```

This is how you would build sc-machine in release mode using system-provided dependencies:

```sh
# release build type with tests (no conan postfix = system-provided deps)
cmake --preset release-with-tests
cmake --build --preset release
```

> We also define `INSTALL` instructions in our CMake. This routine can be launched by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` command. The result of this command will reside in `build/<Release|Debug>/install` (our default install folder). Install folder is basically a pack of portable executable files and shared libraries required to get sc-machine up and running, this command is intended to create clutter-free archives/folders with our code which you can then use in your own projects.

Reviewer: Not all .so files are extensions. Part of them are just dynamic libraries

> We also define `INSTALL` instructions in our CMake. This routine can be launched by appending `--target install` to the `cmake --build --preset <preset>` command. The result of this command will reside in `build/<Release|Debug>/install` (our default install folder). Install folder is basically a pack of portable executable files and shared libraries required to get sc-machine up and running, this command is intended to create clutter-free archives/folders with our code which you can then use in your own projects.

Reviewer: Extensions are libraries that contain modules with agents

## Consuming the package

<details markdown>

<summary>find_package() using CPack artifacts on GitHub Actions</summary>

The package artifacts are available [here](https://github.com/ostis-ai/sc-machine/releases). To use these in your CMake project, download and extract the release for your platform to any convenient location. Then make it available to CMake by appending folder path to `CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH`:

```cmake
# Import sc-machine from the Releases archive.
# You can override this variable via -D<proj_name>_PATH_SC_MACHINE_PATH 
# or CMakeUserPreset.json / CMakePreset.json files.

> set(<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH "/path/to/sc-machine-<version>-<platform>" 

Reviewer 2: no problems, I am just asking questions to check if I am understanding correctly

  CACHE PATH "sc-machine installation path"
)

# It can be overriden using env variables as well.
if(DEFINED ENV{<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH})
  set(<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH "$ENV{<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH}")
endif()

list(APPEND CMAKE_PREFIX_PATH ${<proj_name>_SC_MACHINE_PATH})
```
</details>

<details markdown>

<summary>find_package() using Conan</summary>

- You want to use a released version of sc-machine
  
  Simply add sc-machine as a dependency to your project and use Conan to install it for you.

  conanfile.txt:

  ```ini
  [requires]
  sc-machine/0.10.0

  [generators]
  CMakeDeps
  CMakeToolchain

  [layout]
  cmake_layout
  ```

  ```sh
  conan install .
  cmake --preset conan-release
  cmake --build --preset conan-release
  ```

- You want to use a package version that is not published in a Conan repo:
  
  Export the version you'd like to use to local conan cache:
  ```sh
  git clone https://github.com/ostis-ai/sc-machine
  git checkout <your-commit>

>   cmake --preset release-conan

Reviewer: conan-release is configure/build preset generated by `conan install .` by default (we use it as example). release-conan is custom configure preset for sc-machine
